---
layout: posts
author: Colin Kinz-Thompson
title: Bayesian Sig Figs...
date: 2020-09-10
---

## Significant Figures = Bane of my Existence  Figs
I think it's fair to say that no one likes sig figs. At face value, it just seems like an arbitrary set of rules. But, I will admit that the concept seems to address something that feels intuitive -- how "precisely" we know a number. It just comes across as a very *ad hoc* approach to that idea.

Recently, I had to revisit the basics of sig figs in order to teach it(!). But this time around, I drew some parallels with Bayesian inference.

## Sig figs = a poor man's posterior?
If the idea of sig figs is to quantify the uncertainty in a number, it seems like there should be some connection to a the posterior probability distribution, because the posterior quantifies the uncertainty in our knowledge of some parameters. Just to be concrete, pretend you're doing inference on some data and using a normal distribution likelihood with the conjugate normal-gamma priors (see [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal-gamma_distribution]normal-gamma) in order to estimate the mean and variance/precision from the data. In this case, the marginalized posterior for the mean is a students-T distribution that describes how well you know where mean is located from the data you used in the inference process (see [https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk/Papers/bayesGauss.pdf] K Murphy's conjugate bayesian analysis...). In other words, the width of that marginal posterior describes how well you are able to write down the value of the mean ($\mu$) parameter. This is very similar to the concept of sig figs, which are used to describe how well you are able to write down a number. Basically, by truncating a number to some level using "appropriate" sig figs, you are communicating the width of that marginal posterior (in this example). So, sig figs are kind of like a poor man's version of a posterior -- an interpretation, which I find to be a much more straightforward and far less *ad hoc*. There's no reason to report more digits that are smeared out over the posterior!
